---
blogpost: true
category: Blog
tags: SSH, debug
author: Virginie de Mestral
date: 2025-04-04
---

# Fixing a failing SSH connection to a remote computer

Today's blog post features a user story from Virginie de Mestral, who kindly shared her experience tackling tricky SSH communication issues between AiiDA and a remote HPC system.
This post walks you through the challenges and how they could ultimately be resolved.
We hope you'll find it helpful!

## The exposition

Recently, I configured a new remote host in the land of AiiDA, a supercomputer going by the name of [Alps](https://www.cscs.ch/computers/alps).
While Alps is quite powerful, it is also very fond of security.
Thus, it requires every user who demands its services to validate their SSH key every 24 hours.
Unfortunately, if a user's job lasts longer than those 24 hours, he/she has to re-validate their key and, if needed, re-`play` their simulation job[^1].
Thanks to AiiDA's provenance tracking and checkpointing, re-playing a job usually goes smoothly—past information is preserved and passed on to the next calculation.
However, it can happen that the key re-validation process fails, in which case the initial calculation is put on hold indefinitely.
This can occur (and did so for me), in spite of following exactly the same procedure for key validation as before.

## The rising action

I validated my key to access Alps the other day and sent a routine job.
Everything was working fine until the next 24 hours had passed.
After another re-validation of my key (business as usual), it suddenly had become impossible to reconnect to Alps.
The `verdi computer test alps` command prompted the following message:

```
Error: paramiko.ssh_exception.SSHException: key cannot be used for signing
Error:
Error: Error connecting to 'daint.alps.cscs.ch' through SSH: [SshTransport] No existing session, connect_args were: {'username': 'iam', 'port': 22, 'look_for_keys': True, 'key_filename': '', 'timeout': 60, 'allow_agent': True, 'proxy_jump': '', 'proxy_command': 'ssh -i ~/.ssh/cscs-key iam@ela.cscs.ch /usr/bin/netcat daint.alps.cscs.ch 22', 'compress': True, 'gss_auth': False, 'gss_kex': False, 'gss_deleg_creds': False, 'gss_host': 'daint.alps.cscs.ch'}
[FAILED]: Error while trying to connect to the computer
```

Apparently, AiiDA could not find the right key anymore.

## The climax

Not knowing the exact origin of the problem, one evident attempt was to explicitly tell AiiDA where to find the key.
It might have been looking for the one among many (yes, I have a conservative tendency to accumulate SSH keys) and picked the wrong one (no offense AiiDA, everybody can make mistakes).
I therefore re-configured the SSH setup for my computer using `verdi computer configure core.ssh alps`, setting the `Look for keys` option to False, and instead explicitly provided the absolute path to my `SSH key file`[^2]:

```
$ verdi computer configure core.ssh alps
Report: enter ? for help.
Report: enter ! to ignore the default and set no value.
User name [iam]:
Port number [22]:
Look for keys [Y/n]: n
SSH key file [/user/.ssh/key]: /home/iam/.ssh/cscs-key
Connection timeout in s [60]:
Allow ssh agent [Y/n]: n
SSH proxy jump []: ela.cscs.ch
SSH proxy command []:
Compress file transfers [Y/n]:
GSS auth [False]:
GSS kex [False]:
GSS deleg_creds [False]:
GSS host [daint.alps.cscs.ch]:
Load system host keys [Y/n]:
Key policy (RejectPolicy, WarningPolicy, AutoAddPolicy) [RejectPolicy]:
Use login shell when executing command [Y/n]:
Connection cooldown time (s) [30.0]:
Report: Configuring computer daint.alps for user aiida@localhost.
Success: alps successfully configured for aiida@localhost
```

This time, `verdi computer test alps` confirmed that the remote host Alps was successfully configured[^3].

## The falling action

Thanks to the reconfiguration of the remote host, I could send jobs to Alps and retrieve calculations after completion.
So, problem solved?! Unfortunately, not quite...
As it turned out, I still could not access individual jobs while they were running using the handy `gotocomputer` command:

```
(aiida) [iam@local ~/.aiida]$ verdi calcjob gotocomputer <pk>
Report: going to the remote work directory...
iam@ela.cscs.ch: Permission denied (publickey).
kex_exchange_identification: Connection closed by remote host
```

This is despite being able to SSH into Alps outside of AiiDA via the proxy `ela` without any problem.
But when doing so using `verdi calcjob gotocomputer`, I was denied permission.

## The resolution

The issue can be understood with the knowledge that the `gotocomputer` command calls the regular SSH protocol of the operating system (as one ends up in an _actual shell session_ on the remote machine).
For OS level OpenSSH, the configuration is usually given in the `~/.ssh/config` file, and mine read[^4]:

```
Host ela
  Hostname ela.cscs.ch
  User <my-user>
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/cscs-key

Host alps
  Hostname daint.alps.cscs.ch
  User <my-user>
  Proxyjump ela
  Forwardagent yes
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/cscs-key
  AddKeysToAgent yes
```

However, the actual SSH command constructed by AiiDA when calling `verdi calcjob gotocomputer` uses the values given during `verdi computer configure`, among others, the `SSH Proxy jump`[^5].
Can you spot the difference?
`ela.cscs.ch` for the `SSH Proxy jump` (see `verdi computer configure` above), but `Host ela` in my `~/.ssh/config`.
Thus, the issue could finally be resolved by adding `ela.cscs.ch` to the `Host` in the `~/.ssh/config` file:

```
Host ela, ela.cscs.ch
  Hostname ela.cscs.ch
  User <my-user>
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/cscs-key

Host alps
  Hostname daint.alps.cscs.ch
  User <my-user>
  Proxyjump ela.cscs.ch
  Forwardagent yes
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/cscs-key
  AddKeysToAgent yes
```

## The denouement

Since then, jobs run smoothly on Alps, _and_ can be checked reguralry while running via `verdi calcjob gotocomputer <pk>`.
Peace has returned to the land of AiiDA.

## Afterword (by the devs)

In summary, the following two problems occurred here:

1. Due to changes in the local configuration of SSH keys, the correct key could not be identified automatically by AiiDA (using `paramiko`), which broke all communication of AiiDA with the HPC &rarr; This could be fixed by manually passing the correct absolute path to the key file.
2. A discrepancy between the host that was defined in the `~/.ssh/config` file (`ela`) and the host defined for the `ProxyJump` in AiiDA's computer configuration (`ela.cscs.ch`) led to a failure of the `gotocomputer` command &rarr; This could be fixed by modifying the `~/.ssh/config` file accordingly.

The occurrence of both issues in succession made this problem tricky to solve, and we hope this story is helpful if you ever find yourself encountering failures in the communication of AiiDA with a remote machine via SSH.

Lastly, we would like to expand a bit on the technical background information on this topic for the interested reader:
In AiiDA, the entity responsible for communication with the remote machine via SSH is the `SshTransport` plugin
(`src` [here](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/blob/660fec70ef43a64be7edae3c12f0a0fd5ef84349/src/aiida/transports/plugins/ssh.py)).
It has to adhere to the general `Transport` interface (defined by an abstract base class), and uses the [`paramiko`](https://github.com/paramiko/paramiko) SSH library for its actual implementation.
This is why AiiDA's SSH communication with a remote machine differs from OS level OpenSSH calls most people are used to.
Instead, as already mentioned above, the `verdi calcjob gotocomputer` command is somewhat of an odd one out, as it executes an OS OpenSSH call (necessary to be able to enter a shell session on a remote machine), but actually uses configuration options from the AiiDA setup (that are used to configure `paramiko`), rather than the OS `~/.ssh/config` file.
The situation can be summarized in the following table:

| Route                              | Implementation   | Configuration                                 |
| ---------------------------------- | ---------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| Via the terminal                   | OS level OpenSSH | `~/.ssh/config`                               |
| AiiDA transport tasks              | paramiko         | options set during `verdi computer configure` |
| AiiDA `verdi calcjob gotocomputer` | OS level OpenSSH | options set during `verdi computer configure` |

We are well aware of this issue, so to solve it, in the upcoming `AsyncSshTransport` plugin, intended to be included in the upcoming AiiDA v2.7 release, the default behavior is that the `~/.ssh/config` file is automatically used to set authentication parameters, instead of having to re-enter them manually during computer configuration.
This not only reduces the effort for the user, but also the number of possible error sources.
The `AsyncSshTransport` plugin can be selected through the `core.ssh_async` endpoint during `verdi computer setup`, e.g., via the following configuration YAML file:

```yaml
append_text: ''
default_memory_per_machine: <lots-of-memory>
description: ''
hostname: daint.alps.cscs.ch
label: alps-async
mpiprocs_per_machine: <many-cores>
mpirun_command: mpirun -np {tot_num_mpiprocs}
prepend_text: ''
scheduler: core.slurm
shebang: '#!/bin/bash'
transport: core.ssh_async  # AsyncSshTransport selected here
use_double_quotes: false
work_dir: /capstor/scratch/cscs/iam/aiida
```

The configuration procedure then looks something like the following:

```
$ verdi computer configure core.ssh_async alps-async
Report: enter ? for help.
Report: enter ! to ignore the default and set no value.
Machine(or host) name as in `ssh <your-host-name>` command. (It should be a password-less setup): alps
`ssh alps` successful!
Maximum number of concurrent I/O operations. [8]:
Local script to run *before* opening connection (path) [None]:
Use login shell when executing command [Y/n]:
Connection cooldown time (s) [30.0]:
Report: Configuring computer daint-async for user aiida@localhost.
Success: alps-async successfully configured for aiida@localhost
```

As you can see, it's as simple as running the correct OS `ssh` command during `Computer` configuration, which is then picked up by AiiDA.
We could succesfully circumvent the second issue presented in this blog post using the `AsyncSshTransport` plugin.

For further reading, you can find the original Discourse post that lead to this blog story
[here](https://aiida.discourse.group/t/disconnection-from-remote-machine-permission-denied/583),
AiiDA's general documentation on setting up remote connections
[here](https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/stable/howto/ssh.html),
and, lastly, the PR that adds the `AsyncSshTransport` plugin
[here](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/pull/6626).


**Footnotes**

[^1]: `play` meaning re-submit a paused job, in AiiDA jargon.
[^2]: Automatic key resolution is done by `paramiko`, the SSH library AiiDA's `transport` interface uses. So this is somewhat out of AiiDA's control.
[^3]: There are other notable changes from my initial configuration that I applied for debugging the SSH connection via `verdi computer configure core.ssh alps`:
  For one, I set the `Allow ssh agent` option to False.
  The `ssh-agent` is a Linux tool that helps dealing with passphrase-protected keys, in particular, keeping private keys in memory after unlocking with the passphrase.
  As the SSH keys for Alps are, with a 24-hour lifetime, short-lived, I disabled the passphrase to reduce the number of possible failure points, thus making the `ssh-agent` not required.
  Further, I switched from using `ProxyCommand` to `ProxyJump`, via the `SSH proxy command` and `SSH proxy jump` options, respectively.
  As the `ProxyJump` directive was added to OpenSSH version 7.3, if the machine runs such an older version, `ProxyCommand` is required, otherwise, `ProxyJump` is the recommended option.
[^4]: It might be interesting to know here that `Hostname` contains the _actual, full_ address, while instead `Host` can serve as a kind of alias, e.g.:
    ```
    Host ela
      Hostname ela.cscs.ch
      ...
    ```
    To enable the shorter `ssh ela` command. If, instead, `Host` does contain the full adress, it's not necessary to also specify `Hostname`:
    ```
    Host ela.cscs.ch
      ...
    ```
[^5]: The command is executed on the OS via a Python `os.system` call. The actual constructed command looks something like the following: `ssh -t daint.alps.cscs.ch -l <my-user> -p 22 -i /home/iam/.ssh/cscs-key -o ProxyJump=ela.cscs.ch` (special character escapes and additional bash logic to evaluate if the directory still exists removed for clarity).
